Estimated words per page = ((46 words) / (4 lines)) * (32 lines per page) = ~350 words per page

Chapter 1
--------------------------------
Summary

The first chapter is a microcosm of the rest of the book. Goldacre presents 3 alternative medicene practices: "detox" foot baths, ear candles, and "detox" foot patches. All of these practices have one thing in common; after going through the motions of the treatment, there is an observable change which is meant to demonstrate that there was an effect on the body. The footbath water turns brown while you're using it, the ear candles have an earwax-like substance snside of them post-use, and the "detox" foot patches accumulate a brown, gooey substance on the bottom while one uses them. For each of these treatments, Goldacre describes an "experiment" you can do to show that the treatment's observable results don't have anything to do with the human body.

In a theme that recurs throughought the book, Goldacre then describes how these treatments - although they don't have a direct physiological effect - fill the important role of ritual in human lives. He gives several examples of ritual, describing how each demarcates important things in the human experience.


Analysis / Remarks

Goldacre's tone has a mild aftertaste of condescention to it, which will only get worse as the book goes on. I'm on Goldacre's side here, so I don't mind, however, using a tone like this in his writing won't win many converts.



Chapter 2
--------------------------------
Summary



Chapter 3
--------------------------------
Summary



Chapter 4 - homeopathy (34 pages, ~12k words)
===============================================================
short summary
--------------------------------
Goldacre gives an overview of homeopathy's purported mechanisms, and briefly describes how they conflict with our modern understanding of physics. He describes how - in theory - a study of homeopathy ought to be carried out; he details two methodological failures of many studies: poor blinding and poor randomization. Poor blinding can result in an amplified placebo response for the test group. Poor randomization can result in one group having a better prognosis than the other because one group is just healthier to begin with (due to lifestyle, age, etc).

, both of these failures are fundamentally related to how people respond to the placebo effect. The first failure, poor blinding, results in researchers accidentally tipping their hand to patients, thereby amplifying the placebo effect for one group of people. The second failure, poor randomization, results in one group being more or less susceptible to a favorible prognosis than the other group. This may be due to a stronger belief in the treatment (thereby amplifying the placebo effect) or due to better overall health (due to factors like age, gender, diet, lifestyle, etc).

section-by-section
--------------------------------
"what is homeopathy"
Goldacre starts by introducing the history and basic tenets of homeopathy. Invented in the 1790s by German Samuel Hahnemann, homeopathy was dreamt up and tested anecdotally by a one man team. There are two basic principles of homeopathy: "like cures like" (if a certain substance causes a certain set of symptoms, it will treat illnesses which manifest those same symptoms) and "the more you dilute a cure, the stronger it gets" (indeed, the dilution process is very ritualistic). Substances become homeopathic remedies through a process called "proving", which relies on a very small sample size and self-reporting of symptoms (including dreams (!)).

"the dilution problem"
After introducing homeopathy, Goldacre describes the "dilution problem". At a minimum, most homeopathic remedies involve dilution of the original symptom-causing substance by a factor of 100^30 (30C in homeopath terminology). Clearly, not a single molecule of the original substance will remain. Homeopaths have explained this away by saying that "water has a memory", although there is no evidence in physics literature to back this up. This is silly for a number of other reasons.

This is as far as Goldacre goes into discussing the mechanics of why homeopathy doesn't fit with existing scientific knowledge. The rest of the chapter is devoted to looking at how homeopathy pragmatically effects people.

"I demand a fair trial"
The apparent efficacy of homeopathic treatments - Goldacre posits - can be largely chalked up to two very powerful effects which are entirely unrelated to homeopathy: the placebo effect and regression to the mean. Sometimes, people taking homeopatic treatment can have miraculous recoveries. These stray anecdotes are sometimes used as "evidence" of homeopathy's effictiveness. Goldacre wraps up this section by describing the skeleton of what a "fair trial" of homeopathy would look like: you would give two groups of people identical homeopathy treatment, except that one group would get genuine homeopathic pills while the other group would get a placebo. He says that trials like this have been carried out, some say that homeopathy is just as effective as placebo, whereas others say it's more effective. The studies whith a positive outcome for homeopathy tend to have methodological flaws. In the following two sections, he describes two common methodological flaws.

"Blinding"
Put simply, when the patient OR the doctors administering treatment to the patients know which is the test group, they can inadvertently amplify the placebo effect. If a patent knows they are getting the "real" thing, their expection will be stronger, and the placebo effect will be stronger. Goldacre has studies to back this up. In chapter 5, there are reams of evidence for this.

"Randomization"
If the proper procedures are not taken, researchers may systematically put patients who they expect to have a better prognosis in the "test" group, and patients who they expect to have a worse prognosis in the "control" group (or vice versa). For instance, if you test a homeopathic irritable bowel syndrome remedy, you can get pro-homeopathy results by filling the test group with people who believe in homeopathy and eat a lot of vegetables, and filling the control group with skeptics who drink a lot of lactose-filled milk. Goldacre describes how systematic biases can arise intentionally or subconsciously, and goes over a few effective and ineffective methods of randomization. The exciting piece is a graph showing a negative correlation between "randomizaton quality" (Jadad score) and "odds of finding homeopathy to be good". The better a study is, the more likely it is to find homeopathy to be ineffective.

"Meta-analysis"
Goldacre presents the idea of meta-analysis, that you can synthetically get a very large population study by combining many small population studies of good quality. Sometimes, the meta-analysis can provide  statistically significant evidence when individual trials didn't. A meta-analysis about treating premature infant mortality is held up as a golden example of how meta-analysis can save many lives.
Meta-analyses of homeopathy suggest that it is ineffective. Unfortunately, these analyses are attacked by homeopaths on the grounds that they exclude some trials with methodological flaws. These trials would skew the meta-analysis in favor of homeopathy.

There's a short coda of less principled attacks. He talks about a homeopathic "doctor" who seems to imply during an interview that homeopathic pills have no effect, and that the power of the treatment is in the ritual. He also complains that when homeopaths are confronted with negative data, they just get huffy. Ok, fine. But that's both anecdotal and ad-hominem.

Analysis / Remarks

I don't think that Goldacre's extended attack on homeopathy via the "dilution problem" is of any use to the science crowd, and it won't win over any converts from the homeopath crowd. Furthermore, his argument on page 37 about "how does [water] know to treat my bruise with its memory of arnica [rather than] [feces]?" can easily be debunked by extra layers of pseudoscience that are internally consistent (maybe water loses its memory whenever it evaporates?)
